The paper proposes a Constrained Entity Alignment F-Measure (CEAF) for evaluatingcoreference resolution.
The metric is com puted by aligning reference and system entities (or coreference chains) with the constraint that a system (reference) entity is aligned with at most one reference (system) entity.
We show that the best alignment is a maximum bipartite matching problem which can be solved by theKuhn-Munkres algorithm.
Comparative experiments are conducted to show that the widely known MUC F-measure has serious flaws in evaluating a coreference system.
The proposed metric is also compared with the ACE-Value, the official evaluation metric in the AutomaticContent Extraction (ACE) task, and we con clude that the proposed metric possesses someproperties such as symmetry and better inter pretability missing in the ACE-Value.
A working definition of coreference resolution is partitioning the noun phrases we are interested in into equiv alence classes, each of which refers to a physical entity.We adopt the terminologies used in the Automatic Con tent Extraction (ACE) task (NIST, 2003a) and call eachindividual phrase a mention and equivalence class an en tity.
For example, in the following text segment, (1): ?The American Medical Association voted yesterday to install the heir apparent as its president-elect, rejecting a strong, upstart challenge by a district doctor who argued that the nation?s largest physicians?
group needs stronger ethics and new leadership.?mentions are underlined, ?American Medical Associa tion?, ?its?
and ?group?
refer to the same organization(object) and they form an entity.
Similarly, ?the heir ap parent?
and ?president-elect?
refer to the same person and they form another entity.
It is worth pointing out that the entity definition here is different from what used in the Message Understanding Conference (MUC) task (MUC, 1995; MUC, 1998) ? ACE entity is called coreference chain or equivalence class in MUC, and ACE mention is called entity in MUC.
An important problem in coreference resolution is how to evaluate a system?s performance.
A good performance metric should have the following two properties:
