We argue that while discourse interpretation is an inferential process, syntactic ues constrain this process; we demonstrate his argument with respect o the interpretation of ZEROS, unexpressed arguments of the verb, in Japanese.
The syntactic ues in Japanese discourse that we investigate are the morphological markers for grammatical TOPIC, the postposition wa, as well as those for grammatical functions uch as SUBJECT, ga, OBJECT, o and OBJECT2, ni.
In addition, we investigate the role of speakers EMPATHY, which is the viewpoint from which an event is described.
This is syntactically indicated through the use of verbal compounding, i.e.
the auxiliary use of verbs such as kureta, kita.
Our results are based on a survey of native speakers of their interpretation of short discourses, consisting of minimal pairs, varied by one of the above factors.
We demonstrate that these syntactic ues do indeed affect he interpretation of ZEROS, but that having previously been the TOPIC and being realized as a ZERO also contributes to the salience of a discourse ntity.
We propose a discourse rule of ZERO TOPIC ASSIGNMENT, and show that CENTERING provides constraints on when a ZERO can be interpreted as the ZERO TOPIC.
Introduction 1.1 Centering in Japanese Discourse Recently there has been an increasing amount of work in computational linguistics involving the interpretation f anaphoric elements in Japanese (Yoshimoto 1988; Kuno 1989; Walker, Iida, and Cote 1990; Nakagawa 1992).
These accounts are intended as components of computational systems for machine translation between Japanese and English or for natural anguage processing in Japanese alone.
This paper has three aims: (1) to generalize a computational ccount of the discourse process called CEN- TERING (Sidner 1979; Joshi and Weinstein 1981; Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1983; Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein unpublished), (2) to apply this account o discourse processing * University of Pennsylvania, Computer Science Department, Philadelphia PA 19104.
E-mail: lyn@linc.cis.upenn.edu.
t CSLI, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305.
E-maih iida@csli.stanford.edu.
:~ University of Pennsylvania, Linguistics Department, Philadelphia PA 19104.
E-mail: cote@linc.cis.upenn.edu.
@ 1994 Association for Computational Linguistics Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 in Japanese so that it can be used in computational systems, and (3) to provide some insights on the effect of syntactic factors in Japanese on discourse interpretation.
In the computational literature, there are two foci for research on the interpretation of anaphoric elements such as pronouns.
The first viewpoint focuses on an inferential process driven by the underlying semantics and relations in the domain (Hobbs 1985a; Hobbs et al.
1987; Hobbs and Martin 1987).
A polar focus is to concentrate on the role of syntactic information such as what was previously the topic or subject (Hobbs 1976b; Kameyama 1985; Yoshimoto 1988).
We will argue for an intermediate position with respect o the interpretation of ZEROS, unexpressed arguments of the verb, in Japanese.
Our position is that the interpretation f zeros is an inferential process, but that syntactic information provides constraints on this inferential process (Joshi and Kuhn 1979; Joshi and Weinstein 1981).
We will argue that syntactic ues and semantic interpretation are mutually constraining (Prince 1981b, 1985; Hudson-DZmura 1988).
The syntactic ues in Japanese discourse that we investigate are the morphological markers for grammatical TOPIC, the postposition wa, as well as those for grammatical functions uch as SUBJECT, ga, OBJECT, o, and OBJECT2, ni.
In addition, we investigate the role of speakers EMPATHY, which is the viewpoint from which an event is described.
This can be syntactically indicated through the use of verbal compounding, i.e.
the auxiliary use of verbs such as kureta, kita.
In addition to the argument that a purely inference-based account does not con- sider limits on processing time, another argument against a purely inference-based account is provided by the minimal pair below.
Here, the only difference is whether Ziroo is the subject or the object in the second utterance.
Note that the interpretation of zeros is indicated in parentheses: Example 1 a. Taroo ga b. C. kooen o sanpositeimasita.
Taroo SUBJ park in walking-was Taroo was taking a walk in the park.
Ziroo ga 0 hunsui no mae de mitukemasita.
Ziroo SUBJ OBJ fountain of front in found Ziroo found (Taroo) in front of the fountain.
0 0 kinoo no siai no kekka o kikimasita.
SUBJ OBJ yesterday of game of scores OBJ asked (Ziroo) asked (Taroo) the score of yesterdays game.
Example 2 a. Taroo ga b. C. kooen o sanpositeimasita.
Taroo SUBJ park in walking-was Taroo was taking a walk in the park.
0 Ziroo o hunsui no mae de mitukemasita.
SUBJ Ziroo OBJ fountain of front in found (Taroo) found Ziroo in front of the fountain.
0 0 kinoo no siai no kekka o kikimasita.
SUBJ OBJ yesterday of game of scores obj asked (Taroo) asked (Ziroo) the score of yesterdays game.
In lb and 2b, the syntactic position in which Ziroo is realized has the effect hat lc 194 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse means Ziroo asked Taroo the score of yesterdays game, while 2c means Taroo asked Ziroo the score of yesterdays game.
On the other hand, some purely syntactic accounts require that antecedents for zeros be realized as the grammatical TOPIC, and thus cannot explain the above example because Taroo is never explicitly marked as the topic (Yoshimoto 1988).
In the literature, ZEROS are known as zero pronouns.
We adopt the assumption of earlier work that the interpretation f zeros in Japanese is analogous to the interpre- tation of overt pronouns in other languages (Kuroda 1965; Martin 1976; Kameyama 1985).
Japanese also has overt pronouns, but the use of the overt pronoun is rare in nor- mal speech, and is limited even in written text.
This is mainly because overt pronouns like kare (he) and kanozyo (she) were introduced into Japanese in order to translate gender-insistent pronouns in foreign languages (Martin 1976).
In this paper, we only consider zeros in subcategorized-for argument positions.
Since Japanese doesnt have subject or object verb agreement, there is no syntactic indication that a zero is present in an utterance other than information from subcategorization) First, in Section 1.2 we describe the methodology that we applied in this investi- gation.
In Section 2, we present he theory of centering and some illustrative xam- ples.
Then, in Section 3, we discuss particular aspects of Japanese discourse context, namely grammatical TOPIC and speakers EMPATHY.
We will show how these can easily be incorporated into a centering account of Japanese discourse processing, and give a number of examples to illustrate the predictions of the theory.
We also discuss the way in which a discourse center is instantiated in Section 4.
In Section 5 we propose a discourse rule of ZERO TOPIC ASSIGNMENT, and use the centering model to formalize constraints on when a zero may be interpreted as a ZERO TOPIC.
Our account makes a distinction between two notions of TOPIC--grammatical topic and zero topic.
The grammatical topic is the wa-marked entity, which is by default predicted to be the most salient discourse ntity in the following discourse.
However, there are cases in which it may not be, depending on whether ZERO TOPIC ASSIGNMENT applies.
This analysis provides upport for Shibatanis claim that the interpretation f the topic marker, wa, depends on the discourse context (Shibatani 1990).
ZERO TOPIC ASSIGNMENT actually predicts ambiguities in Japanese discourse interpretation and provides amechanism for deriving interpretations that previous accounts claim would be unavailable.
We delay the review of related research to Section 6 when we can contrast i with our account.
The two major previous accounts are those of Kuno (Kuno 1972, 1976b, 1987, 1989) and Kameyama (Kameyama 1985, 1986, 1988).
Finally, in Section 7, we summarize our results and suggest topics for future research.
1.2 Methodology Most of the examples in this paper are constructed as four utterance discourses that fit one of a number of structural paradigms.
In all of the paradigms, a discourse ntity is 1 When zero pronouns hould be stipulated is still a research issue.
For example, Hasegawa (1984) described a zero pronoun as a phonetically null element in an argument  position.
However, as shown in the following example, Terazu, Yamanasi, and Inada (1980) assumed that zero pronouns are not l imited in their distribution and stipulated them in adjunct positions as well (Iida 1993).
Taroo wa Hanako no kaban o mitukemasita.
Taroo TOP/SUBJ Hanako GEN bag OBJ found Taroo found Hanako" s bag.
0 0 tanzyoobi no purezento irernasita.
birthday GEN present OBJ put (Taroo) put a birthday present (in her bag).
195 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 introduced in the first utterance, and established by the second utterance as the CENTER, what the discourse is about.
The manipulations of context occur with the third and the fourth utterances.
In each case the zero in the third utterance cospecifies the entity already established as the center in the second utterance.
The fourth utterance consists of a potentially ambiguous entence containing two zeros.
The variations in context are as shown below: Third Utterance Fourth Utterance SUBJECT OBJECT(2) SUBJECT OBJECT(2) EXAMPLES zero NP(o or ni) zero zero 5 zero NP(o or ni) zero zero, empathy 36 NP(ga) zero zero zero 32, 34 NP(wa) zero zero zero 4, 33 NP(ga) zero zero zero, empathy 35 Thus we are manipulating factors such as whether a discourse ntity is realized in subject or object position in the third utterance, whether a discourse ntity realized in subject position is ga-marked or wa-marked in the third utterance, and whether a discourse ntity realized in the fourth utterance in object position is marked as the locus of speakers EMPATHY.
We collected a group of about 35 native speakers by solicitation on the InterNet o provide judgments for most of the examples given in this paper.
These native speakers were readers of the newsgroups sci.lang.japanese and comp.research.japan.
They were thus typically well-educated, bilingual engineers.
Whenever an example was tested in this way, we provide the number of informants who chose each possible interpretation to the right of the example.
Some examples that are included for expository reasons were not tested.
Participation i  our survey was completely voluntary, and the data were collected over three surveys.
Thus the numbers of subjects varied from one survey to another, and this is reflected in the numbers accompanying our examples.
This data collection was carried out on written examples using electronic mail in a situation in which the informants could take as long as they wanted to decide which interpretation they preferred.
The instructions sent with the surveys are given in Appendix A.
This paradigm clearly cannot provide information on which interpretation a sub- ject might arrive at first and then perhaps change based on other pragmatic factors, and thus it contrasts with reaction time studies.
However, the judgments given should be stable and should reflect he fact that our informants were able to use all the informa- tion in the discourse.
It is a useful paradigm given that we are exploring the correlation of syntactic ues and discourse interpretation.
It has been claimed that syntactic ues are only used in automatic processing and can be overridden by deeper processing.
However, Hudsons results suggest hat subjects may judge a discourse sequence to be nonsensical when it is incoherent according to centering (Hudson-DZmura 1988).
Di Eugenio claims that discourse sequences in Italian that are not discourse-coher- ent according to centering theory produce a garden-path effect (Di Eugenio 1990).
The methods we used allow us to explore the results of these interactions, and yet it 196 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse would be beneficial for these results to be expanded upon by careful psychological experimentation.
For most of the examples reported here, we asked subjects to choose one preferred interpretation instead of allowing them to rank interpretations.
The motivation for doing this was to force differences to come out for slight preferences, with the theory being that other variations would come out across subjects.
In a few cases we allowed subjects to indicate no preference; these examples will be clearly indicated.
In addition, we used the same gender for multiple discourse ntities to prevent any tendency for judgments to be influenced by gender stereotypes.
We also avoided using verbs with causal biases toward one of their arguments, and we used few cue words such as but, because, and then, which could result in a bias toward, say, a cause-effect or temporal  sequence of events interpretation.
We also omitted honorific markers, which are normal ly a part of Japanese ambiguity resolution.
2 This was done to isolate the effects of the variables that we were exploring in this study, namely topic marking, grammatical  function, empathy, and realization with a zero or with a full noun phrase.
Centering Theory Within a theory of discourse, CENTERING is a computational model  of the process by which conversants coordinate attention in discourse (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein un- published).
Centering has its computational foundations in the work of Grosz and Sidner (Grosz 1977; Sidner 1979; Grosz and Sidner 1986) and was further developed by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1983, unpublished) and Joshi and Weinstein (1981).
Centering is intended to reflect aspects of ATYENTIONAL STATE in a tripartite view of discourse structure that also includes INTENTIONAL STRUCTURE and LINGUISTIC STRUC- TURE (Grosz and Sidner 1986).
In Grosz and Sidners theory of discourse structure, discourses can be segmented based on intentional structure, and a discourse segment exhibits both local and global coherence.
Global coherence depends on how each seg- ment relates to the overall purpose of the discourse; local coherence depends on as- pects such as the syntactic structure of the utterances in that segment, the choice of referring expressions, and the use of ellipses.
CENTERING models local coherence and is formalized as a system of constraints and rules.
Our analysis uses an adaptation of the Centering algorithm that was developed by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard, based on these constraints and rules (Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987; Walker 1989).
The purpose of centering as part of a computational model  of discourse interpre- tation is to model  ATTENTIONAL STATE in discourse in order to control inference (Joshi and Kuhn 1979; Joshi and Weinstein 1981).
3 Our approach to model ing attentional state is to explore aspects of the correlation between syntax and discourse function.
This assumes that there are language conventions about discourse salience and that conversants attempt o maintain a sense of shared context.
2 While native speakers understandably found some of these xamples "stilted" or "awkward," they were still able to give their judgments based on the information that was provided in the discourses.
3 Recent work in situation theory proposes to control computation with a similar notion of background information i  terms of constants of the situation that thus are not explicitly realized in an utterance (Nakashima 1990).
The situation-theoretic work does not as yet distinguish shared knowledge that determines discourse salience and derives from the discourse context and the way utterances are expressed (Clark and Haviland 1977; Clark and Marshall 1981; Prince 1981b) from shared knowledge that is part of general background knowledge such as cultural assumptions (Prince 1978a; Joshi 1982) or shared knowledge that might derive from the task context (Grosz 1977).
197 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 Section 2.1 presents the centering rules and constraints.
Sections 2.2 and 2.3 illus- trate the theory and the definitions with a number of examples.
Section 2.4 discusses the centering algorithm for the resolution of zeros in Japanese.
2.1 Rules and Constraints The centering model is very simple.
Each utterance in a discourse segment has two structures associated with it.
First, each utterance in a discourse has associated with it a set of discourse ntities called FORWARD-LOOKING CENTERS, Cf.
Centers are semantic entities that are part of the discourse model.
Second, there is a special member of this set called the BACKWARD-LOOKING CENTER, Cb.
The Cb is the discourse ntity that the utterance most centrally concerns, what has been elsewhere called the theme (Reinhart 1981; Horn 1986).
The Cb entity links the current utterance to the previous discourse.
The set of FORWARD-LOOKING CENTERS, Cf, is ranked according to discourse salience.
We will discuss factors that determine the ranking below.
The highest-ranked member of the set of forward-looking centers is referred to as the PREFERRED CENTER, Cp.
4 The PREFERRED CENTER represents a prediction about the Cb of the following utterance.
Sometimes the Cp will be what the previous egment of discourse was about, the Cb, but this is not necessarily the case.
This distinction between looking back to the previ- ous discourse with the Cb and projecting preferences for interpretation i subsequent discourse with the Cp is a key aspect of centering theory.
In addition to the structures for centers, Cb and Cf, the theory of centering specifies a set of rules and constraints.
Constraints are meant o hold strictly whereas rules may sometimes be violated.
CONSTRAINTS For each utterance Ui in a discourse segment UI~.. .
There is precisely one backward-looking center Cb.
Every element of the forward centers list, Cf(Ui), must be realized in Ui.
The center, Cb(Ui), is the highest-ranked element of Cf(Ui-D that is realized in Ui.
5 Constraint (1) says that there is one central discourse ntity that the utterance is about, and that is the Cb.
The second constraint depends on the definition of realizes.
An utterance U realizes a center c if c is an element of the situation described by U, or c is the semantic interpretation of some subpart of U (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein unpublished).
Thus the relation REALIZE describes zeros, explicitly realized discourse entities, and those implicitly realized centers that are entities inferable from the dis- course situation (Prince 1978a, 1981b).
A specialization of the relation REALIZE is the relation DIRECTLY REALIZE.
A center is directly realized if it corresponds to a phrase in an utterance.
We restrict our focus to entities realized by noun phrases; however, it is clear that propositions can be centers, so we assume that the account given here can be extended to propositional entities as well (Webber 1978; Sidner 1979; Prince 1986, 1978b; Ward 1985).
4 The notion of PREFERRED CENTER corresponds toSidners notion of EXPECTED FOCUS (Sidner 1983).
5 This could possibly be rephrased as: Assume the Cp(Ui-1 is the Cb(Ui) unless there is evidence to the contrary (Carter 1987).
198 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse As we discuss further in Section 3, zeros refer to entities that are already in the discourse context.
The fact that the current utterance REALIZES one or more zeros follows from information specified in the subcategorization frame of the verb.
These arguments must  be interpreted and thus acquire a degree of discourse salience that nonsubcategorized-for discourse entities lack.
Constraint (3) stipulates that the ranking of the forward centers, Cf, determines from among the elements that are realized in the next utterance, which of them will be the Cb for that utterance.
If the PREFERRED CENTER, Cp(Ui), is realized in Ui+l, it is predicted to be the Cb(Ui+l) .
We will use the following forward center ranking for Japanese: 6 (GRAMMATICAL OR ZERO) TOPIC > EMPATHY > SUBJECT > OBJECT2 > OBJECT > OTHERS Backward-looking centers, Cbs, are often deleted or pronominal ized and some transitions between discourse segments are more coherent han others.
According to the theory of centering, coherence is measured by the hearer s  inference load when interpreting a discourse sequence (Joshi and Weinstein 1981; Grosz, Joshi, and Wein- stein unpublished).
For instance, discourse segments that continue centering the same entity are more coherent han those that repeatedly shift from one center to another.
These observations are encapsulated in two rules: .
RULES For each Ui in a discourse segment U1, .
,  Urn: If some element of Cf(Ui- l )  is realized as a pronoun in Ui, then so is Cb(Ui).
Transition states are ordered.
CONTINUE is preferred to RETAIN is preferred to SMOOTH-SHIFT is preferred to ROUGH-SHIFT.
7 Rule (1) captures the intuition that pronominal ization is one way to indicate dis- course salience.
It follows from Rule (1) that if there are multiple pronouns in an utterance, one of these must  be the Cb.
In addition, if there is only one pronoun, then that pronoun must  be the Cb.
For Japanese, we extend this rule directly to zeros, assuming that zeros in Japanese correspond to destressed pronouns in English.
Rule (2) states that model ing attentional state depends on analyzing adjacent ut- terances according to a set of transitions that measure the coherence of the discourse segment in which the utterance occurs.
Measuring coherence is based on an estimate of the hearer s  inference load, but this measure must  always be relative since there is no grammar  of discourse.
Thus methods for exploring these issues must  use compar- ative measures of how some discourses are easier to process than others.
Centering theory models this by stipulating that some transitions are preferred over others.
The typology of transitions from one utterance, Ui, to the next is based on two factors: whether the backward-looking center, Cb, is the same from Ui-1 to Ui, and whether this discourse entity is the same as the preferred center, Cp, of Ui.
8 6 This ranking is consistent with Kunos Empathy Hierarchies and with Kameyamas Expected Center Order (Kuno 1987; Kameyama 1985, 1988).
This will be discussed in Section 6.
We do not include discourse ntities for verb phrases or other propositional entities in this ranking since we have not studied their contribution (but see Sidner 1979, 1981 and Carter 1987).
7 Smooth-shift was called shifting-1 by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987).
8 It is possible that restricting the relation between the Cb(Ui) and the Cb(Ui_l) to be coreference (equality) may be too strong.
Future work should examine the role of shifts to functionally dependent entities or entities related by partially ordered set (POSET) relations to the previous Cb.
199 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui-1) OR Cb(Ui-1) = [?1 Cb(Ui) # Cb(Ui-1) Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) CONTINUE SMOOTH-SHIFT Cb(Ui)  Cp(Ui) RETAIN  ROUGH-SHIFT Figure 1 Centering transition states, rule 2.
KEY BACKWARD-LOOKING CENTER = Cb PREFERRED CENTER = Cp Uninstantiated Cb = [?]
Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui_l), or there is no Cb(Ui-1) Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) If both (1) and (2) hold then we are in a CONTINUE transition.
The CONTINUE transition corresponds to cases where the speaker has been talking about a particular entity and indicates an intention to continue talking about that entity.
9If (1) holds but (2) doesnt  hold then we are in a RETAIN transition.
RETAIN corresponds to a situation where the speaker is intending to SHIFT onto a new entity in the next utterance and is signalling this by realizing the current center in a lower ranked position on the Cf (examples follow below).
If (1) doesnt  hold then we are in one of the SHIFT states depending on whether or not (2) holds.
This definition of transition states is summar ized in Figure 1 (Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987).
We will use the notation of Cb(Ui-1) = [?]
for cases where there is no Cb(Ui-1).
Section 4 will discuss center instantiation.
The combination of the constraints, rules, and transition states makes a set of testable predictions about which interpretations hearers will prefer because they re- quire less processing.
For example, maximal ly coherent segments are those that require less processing time.
A sequence of a CONTINUE followed by another CONTINUE should only require the hearer to keep track of one main discourse entity, which is currently both the Cb and the Cp.
A single pronoun in an utterance is the current Cb (by Rule 1) and can be interpreted to cospecify the discourse ntity realized by Cp(Ui-1) in one step (Constraint 3).
The ordering of the Cf is the main determinant of which transition state holds between adjacent utterances.
This means that the predictions of the theory are largely determined by the ranking of the items on the Cf.
But there are many factors that can contribute to the salience of a discourse entity; among them are factors that we will not examine here such as lexical semantics, intonation, word-order, and tense.
In this 9 A prediction made by the preference for CONTINUE is that intersentential antecedents for pronouns will be preferred over intrasentential c ndidates.
This preference is one that distinguishes Centering for pronoun interpretation from the proposal made by Hobbs (1976a, 1976b).
However, this preference needs to be constrained further by the fact that sortal filters may rule out the Cp of the previous utterance as the current Cb.
In this case the data suggest that perhaps intrasentential c ndidates should be preferred (Walker 1989).
Carter explored this in his extension of Sidners theory of local focusing (Carter 1987).
10 See Hudson-DZmura (1988) for an examination ofthe role of lexical semantics in centering.
200 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse paper we explore the influence of various syntactic factors, which we discuss in detail in Section 3.
We will also examine the relative contribution of pronominalization a d postposition marking in Section 5.
We postulate that the Cf ordering will vary from language to language depending on the means the language provides for expressing discourse function.
However much of this variation can be captured in the ranking of the Cf due to the modularity of the theory.
In Sections 2.2 and 2.3 we will present some simple examples to motivate these definitions.
In Section 2.4 we will present a slightly modified version of the centering algorithm (Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987).
In the following discussion we as- sume that the centering rules and constraints and the notion of centering transition states have some cognitive reality (Brennan submitted; Hudson-DZmura 1988; Gor- don, Grosz, and Gilliom 1993; Hudson-DZmura and Tanenhaus, 1995).
However, we make no claims about he cognitive reality of the centering algorithm that we discuss in Section 2.4.
2.2 The Distinction between Continue and Retain This theory predicts preferences in the interpretation of utterances whose meaning depends on parameters from the discourse context.
Thus if there are still multiple possibilities for interpretation after the application of all constraints and rules, the ordering on transitions applies, and CONTINUE interpretations are preferred (Rule 2).
Indeed, many cases of the preference for one interpretation ver another follow directly from the distinction between the transition states of CONTINUE and RETAIN.
Let us look at a simple example.
In the discourse segment in 3, the zero in the second sentence is understood as referring to Taroo, and not to Hanako.
Remember that the interpretation of zeros is indicated with parentheses.
Example 3 a. Taroo wa b. Hanako o eiga ni sasoimasita.
Taroo TOP/SUBJ Hanako OBJ movie to invited Taroo invited Hanako to the movie.
Cb: TAROO Cf: [TAROO, HANAKO] 0 itiniti-zyuu nani mo te ni tukimasendesita.
SUBJ all-day anything even hand to attached-not (Taroo) could not do anything all day.
Cb: TAROO Cf: [TAROO] In example 3, the Cf from 3a contains the discourse ntity for Taroo as the first element and for Hanako as the second element.
When the unexpressed argument is interpreted in 3b, the information from this Cf is used.
Because the zero subject may REALIZE either Taroo or Hanako, both Constraint 3 and Rule 1 would be obeyed with either interpretation.
11 However by interpreting the zero as Taroo, Taroo is the Cb, and it is possible to get a preferred CONTINUE interpretation Taroo could not do anything all day.
In this interpretation, Taroo is both the Cb(3b) and the Cp(3b).
11 The hypothesis that wa in 3a instantiates Taroo as the Cb will be discussed in Section 4.
201 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 2.3 The Distinction between Smooth-Shift and Rough-Shift In example 4, we illustrate the difference between the transition states of ROUGH- SHIFT and SMOOTH-SHIFT.
Remember that ROUGH-SHIFT is claimed to be less coherent than SMOOTH-SHIFT (Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987).
In both cases the speaker has shifted the center to a different discourse ntity.
However, in the SMOOTH-SHIFT transition state, the speaker has indicated an intention to continue talking about the recently shifted-to entity by realizing that entity in a highly ranked Cf position such as subject, whereas no such indication is available with the ROUGH-SHIFT transition.
The numbers hown to the right of an interpretation correspond to how many native speakers preferred that interpretation.
Example 4 a. Taroo ga kooen de hon o yondeimasita.
Taroo SUBJ park at book OBJ reading-was Taroo was reading a book in the park.
Cfl: [TAROO, BOOK] SUBI OBJ b.
0 koora o kai ni baiten ni hairimasita.
SUBJ cola OBJ buy to shop into entered (Taroo) entered a shop to buy a cola.
Cb: TAROO Cfl: [TAROO, COLA] CONTINUE SUBJ OBJ c. Ziroo wa 0 sokode guuzen dekuwasimasita.
Ziroo TOP/SUBJ OBJ there by chance met Ziroo met (Taroo) there by chance.
Cb: TAROO Cf: [ZIROO, TAROO] RETAIN TOP OBJ d. 0 0 eiga ni sasoimasita.
SUBJ OBJ movie to invited.
(Ziroo) invited (Taroo) to a movie.
Cb: ZIROO Cfl: [ZIROO, TAROO] SMOOTH-SHIFT 32 subj obj Cf2: [TAROO, ZIROO] ROUGH-SHIFT 2 SUBJ OBJ In example 4, the use of TOPIC marking in the phrase Ziroo wa of utterance (c) means that (c) is interpreted as a RETAINJ 2 Ziroo becomes the most highly ranked discourse ntity for c, although Taroo is the Cb since Taroo was most highly ranked for utterance (b) (by Constraint 3).
Then when we apply the Centering algorithm in (d), there are two candidates for the Cb(d) from the Cf(c), both Ziroo and Taroo.
However, this time when constraint 3 applies, stipulating that the Cb must be the highest-ranked 12 It has also been claimed that symmetric verbs uch as meet by chance mark EMPATHY on the subject (Kuno 1976a).
202 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse element of Cf(c) realized in 4d, Ziroo must be the highest-ranked ntity realized, and therefore must be the Cb.
At this point it is clear that some kind of SHIFT is forced by the application of constraint 3.
The two candidates are a SMOOTH-SHIFT and a ROUGH- SHIFT.
The SMOOTH-SHIFT interpretation corresponds to the reading Ziroo invited Taroo to a movie whereas the ROUGH-SHIFT interpretation corresponds tothe Taroo invited Ziroo reading.
The SMOOTH-SHIFT interpretation is more highly ranked, thus considered more coherent and so is the preferred interpretation (Z = 10.93, p < .001).
2.4 The Centering Algorithm The CENTERING ALGORITHM that was proposed by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard incorporates the centering rules and constraints in addition to contra-indexing con- straints on coreference (Reinhart 1976; Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987; Iida 1993).
These contra-indexing constraints specify that in a sentence such as He likes him, that he and him cannot co-specify the same discourse ntity.
The algorithm applies centering theory to the problem of resolving anaphoric reference.
Application of the algorithm requires three basic steps.
GENERATE possible Cb-Cf combinations FILTER by constraints, e.g.
contra-indexing,?
sortal predicates, centering rules and constraints RANK by transition orderings In order to apply this algorithm to Japanese, possible Cb-Cf combinations (GEN- ERATE step 1) must be constructed from the surface string and information from the subcategorization frame of the verb.
First the verb subcategorization s examined, and if there are more entities than appear in the surface string, zeros are postulated as forward centers.
These zeros are then treated just like pronouns in English by the rest of the algorithm.
We use a different ranking for the Cf for Japanese than for English, but this has no effect on the actual algorithm itself since the Cf ranking is a declarative parameter.
The steps of the algorithm given above can be interleaved to improve computa- tional efficiency.
A simple implementation is to: ?
Never propose a Cf that violates linguistic onstraints on contra-indexing.
(In other words, apply the contra-indexing filter as early as possible to avoid Cb-Cf combinations that will be eliminated by that filter,) ?
If there are pronouns in an utterance, only propose pronouns as possible Cbs.
(Collect he pronouns from the proposed Cfs as Cbs, from Rule 1.)
In addition, it is simple to add additional filters to step (2) of the algorithm.
For instance, any constraint that is lexically specified such as [?animacy] can be easily applied as a filter.
It is also possible to pursue a best first strategy by interleaving steps (1), (2), and (3) so that a CONTINUE will be found without extra processing if one exists.
In example 5, we illustrate in more detail how the steps of the algorithm work and the difference between CONTINUE and RETAIN.
Each utterance shows what the Cb and Cf would be for that utterance.
We will mostly be concerned with the process of resolving the two zeros in utterance 5c.
203 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 Example 5 a. Taroo wa b. saisin no konpyuutaa o kaimasita.
TOP/SUBJ newest of computer OBJ bought Taroo bought a new computer.
Cb: TAROO Cf: [TAROO, COMPUTER] 0 John ni sassoku sore o misemasita.
SUBJ John OBJ2 at once that OBJ showed Taroo) showed it at once to John.
C. Cb: TAROO Cf: [TAROO, JOHN, COMPUTER] CONTINUE 0 0 atarasiku sonawatta kinoo o setumeisimasita.
SUBJ OBJ2 newly equipped function OBJ explained (Taroo) explained the newly equipped functions to (John).
Cb: TAROO Cfl: [TAROO, JOHN] CONTINUE 27 SUBJ OBJ Cf2: [JOHN, TAROO] RETAIN 1 SUBJ OBJ Cf3: [JOHN, JOHN] CONTRA-INDEX FILTER SUBJ OBJ Cf4: [TAROO, TAROO] CONTRA-INDEX FILTER SUBJ OBJ Example 5c has explained as the main verb, which requires an animate subject and object2.
Since there are two animate zeros in 5c, which are also contra-indexed by syntactic onstraints, both Ziroo and Taroo must be realized in 5c.
Constraint (3) restricts the Cb to Taroo as the highest-ranked lement from the Cf(Sb).
The interpretive process must also generate the possible candidates for the Cf.
If no constraints applied, then all four candidates shown above as Cfl, Cf2, Cf3, and Cf4 would be possible.
However, the contraindexing filter will rule out Cf3 and Cf4.
As mentioned above, there is no reason that these filters cannot be applied at the GENERATE phase rather than later on.
The only CONTINUE interpretation available, Taroo explained the newly equipped func- tions to John, corresponds to the forward centers Cfl.
It is a CONTINUE interpretation because Cb(5c) = Cb(5b) and also Cb(5c) = Cp(5c).
The RETAIN interpretation is less preferred and is defined by the fact that Cb(5c) = Cb(5b), but Cb(5c) ~ Cp(5c).
This example supports the claim that a CONTINUE is preferred over a RETAIN(Z ~- 13.24, p < .001).
In order to find this preferred continue interpretation in a best first fashion, Taroo as the Cp(Ui-1) would be tried first as the Cb(Ui), and as the interpretation for the subject.
Contraindexing rules out Taroo as the object, so John would be tried next as the object.
In the next section, we examine further the application of centering to the inter- pretation of zeros in Japanese.
We will examine the ranking of forward centers that we have adopted for Japanese and explain how this is partially determined by the way the Japanese language allows a speaker to express discourse functions.
We will 204 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse also give some examples of the interpretation of zeros in cases involving Japanese discourse markers for TOPIC and EMPATHY.
Centering in Japanese The theory of centering is a formal specification that is intended to model attentional state and is defined by the rules and constraints given in Section 2.1.
Attentional state in turn constrains the discourse participants interpretation process; one aspect of attentional state is the notion of discourse salience.
In the centering model, the ordering of the forward centers is an approximation f discourse salience.
This in turn is the main determinant of discourse interpretation processes such as the resolution of zeros in Japanese.
A crucial question then is what discourse factors must be considered to determine the ordering of the forward centers, Cf, in Japanese discourse.
Being a subject has been shown to be an important factor for English; this is re- flected in a Cf ordering by grammatical function (Prince 1981b; Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987; Hudson-DZmura 1988; Brennan submitted).
Aspects of surface or- der may also affect the interpretation (Di Eugenio 1990; Hajicova and Vrbova 1982).
An interpretation algorithm can also use pronominalization as an indicator of what the speaker believes is salient (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein unpublished).
Furthermore, ze- ros in Japanese are not realized syntactically sothat there must be a way to distinguish zeros from other entities inferred to be part of a discourse situation.
Consider: Example 6 Taroo ga 0 aimasita.
Taroo SUBJ OBJ2 met Taroo met (0).
This sentence is not felicitous unless the addressee has already been given some information about the person that Taroo met, either in the current discourse or in previous discourses.
In contrast, nonsubcategorized-for arguments such as adjuncts are not necessarily given a specific interpretation, but rather are given a nonspecific one.
Example 7 Taroo ga Hanako ni aimasita.
Taroo SUBJ Hanako OBJ2 met Taroo met Hanako.
The sentence means that Taroo met Hanako at some time in some place: the tem- poral location of the meeting situation eed not be specified.
The speaker can utter this sentence ven if the addressee does not know where and when Taroo met Hanako.
Thus, in this work, we only represent obligatorily subcategorized arguments of the verb on the Cf, assuming that the salience of discourse ntities is partially determined by virtue of filling a verbs argument role, and the information from the subcatego- rization frame is used to determine that a zero is present in an utterance.
Zeros are then interpreted with reference to the current context.
Prince has pro- posed that the current context should be categorized by ASSUMED FAMILIARITY (Prince 1981b; Horn 1986), with a concomitant goal of determining the correlation between the use of certain linguistic forms and the types of assumed familiarity.
The first di- vision of assumed familiarity is into the subtypes of NEW, INFERABLE, and EVOKED.
205 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 NEW can be divided into BRAND-NEW, discourse ntities that are both new to the dis- course and new to the hearer, and UNUSED, discourse entities old to the hearer but new to the discourse.
The information status of EVOKED can be further divided into TEXTUALLY EVOKED, old in the discourse and therefore old to the hearer as well, and SITUATIONALLY EVOKED, entities in the current situation.
INFERABLES are technically both hearer-new and discourse-new but depend on information that is old to the hearer and the discourse, and are often treated by speakers as though they were both hearer-old and discourse-old.
There is a hierarchy of assumed familiarity in terms of discourse salience: Assumed Familiarity Hierarchy (Prince 1981b): TEXTUALLY EVOKED > SITUATIONALLY EVOKED > INFERABLE > UNUSED > BRAND-NEW Zeros typically refer to EVOKED entities, 13 but there is a scale of relative salience among the EVOKED entities.
In our theory this is modeled with Cf ranking.
We repeat the proposed ranking of the Cf here and justify it in the following sections: 14 Cf Ranking for Japanese (GRAMMATICAL OR ZERO) TOPIC > EMPATHY > SUBJECT > OBJECT2 > OBJECT > OTHERS The relevance of the notions of TOPIC and speakers EMPATHY to centering is that a discourse entity realized as the TOPIC or the EMPATHY LOCUS is more salient and should be ranked higher on the Cf.
Whenever a discourse ntity simultaneously fulfills multiple roles, the entity is usually ranked according to the highest ranked role.
In the following sections we will discuss the motivation for this ranking.
Section 3.1 discusses the role of the grammatical topic marker wa in Japanese.
Section 3.2 explains the role of EMPATHY in Japanese discourse salience and shows that (GRAMMATICAL OR ZERO) TOPIC > EMPATHY and that EMPATHY > SUBJ.
Section 3.2.1 shows how the centering algorithm handles utterances with empathy loci.
Zero topics will not be discussed until Section 5.
3.1 Topic Discourse ntities that are EVOKED, INFERABLE, or UNUSED can be marked as the TOPIC.
The speaker cannot mark an entity as the grammatical TOPIC unless the hearer is aware of the object that s /he is going to talk about (Prince 1978a; Kuno 1976b).
For example: Example 8 Hutari wa paatii ni kimasita.
two-person TOP/SUBJ party to came Speaking of two persons, they came to the party.
13 Under certain circumstances that we cannot explore here, it appears that zeros can at times be used to refer to inferable or unused entities, just as pronouns in English sometimes can be.
14 This ranking resembles Kunos Empathy Hierarchy and Kameyamas Expected Center Order, but we distinguish two kinds of TOPIC and we posit that OBJECT2 is more salient han OBJECT.
We continue Kunos use of the term EMPATHY to represent the EMPATHY LOCUS, whereas Kameyama used the property IDENT for EMPATHY (Kameyama 1988).
206 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse Example 8 is felicitous only when hutari (two persons) is understood as meaning the two people under discussion.
The sentence never means that the people who came to the party numbered two.
The fact that the wa-marked entity should be discourse-old is also shown by the fact that a wh-question cannot be answered with a wa-marked NP.
Example 9 a. Dono hito b-1.
ga which person SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Which person defended Ziroo ?
Taroo ga Ziroo o bengosimasita.
Taroo SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Taroo defended Ziroo.
*Taroo wa Ziroo o bengosimasita.
Taroo TOP/SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Taroo defended Ziroo.
Ziroo o bengosimasita ka.
Q What the question context shows is that even in a simple declarative sentence, the use of the topic marker wa contrasts with the subject marker ga in what is understood as already in the discourse context.
For instance, in a discourse initial utterance, 10a, assumes no shared information or that someone defended Ziroo and asserts that the someone is Taroo.
In 10b, the discourse-old proposition is that Taroo did something and what is asserted is that what he did was defend Ziroo.
Example 10 a. Taroo ga b. Ziroo o bengosimasita.
Taroo SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Taroo defended Ziroo.
Taroo wa Ziroo o bengosimasita.
Taroo TOP/SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Taroo defended Ziroo.
While topics are often subjects, subject and grammatical topic need not coincide.
Any argument can be realized as a topic, as shown in examples 11 and 12.
Example 11 Taroo wa Hanako ga bengosita.
Taroo TOP Hanako SUBJ defended As for Taroo, Hanako defended (him).
Example 12 Tokyoo e wa Hanako ga itta?
Tokyo to TOP Hanako SUBJ went To Tokyo, Hanako went.
The assumption that the TOPIC is more salient than the SUBJECT, when the two are different, is supported by the fact that an indefinite NP in subject position such as who, which, or somebody cannot be regarded as the TOPIC: an indefinite NP is never marked by the topic marker wa, but by the subject marker ga. For example: 207 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 Example 13 Dono hito ga Ziroo o bengosimasita ka.
which person SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Q Which person defended Ziroo ?
Example 14 *Dono hito wa Ziroo o bengosimasita ka.
who person TOP/SUBJ Ziroo OBJ defended Q Which person defended Ziroo?
It is clear from these examples that the grammatical  topic, wa-marked entity, in Japanese, represents assumable shared information in an ongoing conversation.
It has been taken to be the  theme  or what  the sentence is about  (Kuno 1973; Shibatani 1990).
In our framework, this is the role of the Cb.
We will provide evidence support ing this position in Section 4.
However,  we claim that this is just a default and that other factors can contribute to establishing or continuing an entity as the Cb.
Kuno also claims that a zero subject is equivalent to a wa-marked entity, and we provide support for this claim in Section 5, showing that the property of having previously been the Cb, in combination with being realized by a zero, contributes to an entity being the Cp.
3.2 Empathy Kuno (1976b) proposed a notion of EMPATHY in order to present he speaker s  position or identification in describing a situation.
In a hugging situation involving a man named Taroo and his son Saburoo, Kuno notes that this situation can be described in various ways, some of which are shown in example 15.
Example 15 a. Taroo hugged Saburoo.
b. Taroo hugged his son.
c. Saburoos father hugged him.
These sentences differ from each other with respect o camera ngle, the position that the speaker takes to observe and describe this situation.
In 15a, the speaker is assumed to be describing the event objectively: the camera is placed at the same distance from both Taroo and Saburoo.
On the other hand, the camera may be placed closer to Taroo in 15b and closer to Saburoo in 15c.
This is shown by the use of relational terms such as son and father, respectively.
The term EMPATHY is used for this camera angle, which indicates the speaker s  position among the participants in the event describedY 15 The speakers position is not determined by his physical proximity, but rather is measured by the emotional or social relationship.
In this sense, the term speakers identification (Kuno 1976b) may be more suitable than the term speakers position.
Furthermore, the notion of EMPATHY is different from that of perspective (Iida 1993).
Empathy is the speakers identification with a discourse ntity, but the speaker does not have to take the perspective of the person who he empathizes with.
For example, consider the following utterance: (i) Taroo wa Hanako ni migigawa no hon o totte-kureta.
Taroo TOP/SUBJ Hanako OBJ2 right GEN book  OBJ take-gave Taroo did Hanako aflavor in taking a book on his~her right.
In this example, the speaker empathizes with Hanako as indicated by the empathy verb kureru, yet he still can describe the given situation from Taroos perspective, which is indicated by ambiguity in the interpretation f the deictic expression migigawa no (right of).
208 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse In Japanese the realization of speakers empathy is especially important when describing an event involving giving or receiving.
There is no way to describe agiving and receiving situation objectively (Kuno and Kaburaki 1977).
In 16, the use of the verb kureru indicates the speakers empathy with Ziroo, the discourse ntity realized in object position, while in 17, the speakers empathy with the subject Taroo is indicated by the use of the past tense form yatta of the verb yaru.
Example 16 Taroo ga Ziroo ni hon o kureta.
Taroo SUBJ Ziroo OBJ2 book OBJ gave Taroo gave Ziroo a book.
EMPATHY=OBJ2=ZIROO Example 17 Taroo ga Ziroo ni hon o yatta.
Taroo SUBJ Ziroo OBJ2 book OBJ gave Taroo gave Ziroo a book.
EMPATHY=SUB=TAROO A verb that is sensitive to the speakers empathy is an EMPATHY-LOADED verb.
The EMPATHY LOCUS is the argument position whose referent he speaker automatically identifies with.
In other words, the verb kureru has the EMPATHY LOCUS on the object, while verbs like yaru place the EMPATHY LOCUS on the subject.
The use of deictic verbs such as kuru (come), iku (go), okuru (send to), and yokosu (send in) also encode the speakers empathy.
For example, the speaker indicates empathy with Taroo by using the past tense form kita of the verb kuru in the following example.
Example 18 Hanako wa Taroo no tokoro ni kita.
Hanako  TOP/SUBJ Taroo of place to came Hanako came to Taroos place.
Many Japanese verbs can be made into empathy-loaded verbs because of a pro- ductive verb-compounding operation by which these empathy-loaded verbs are used as the auxiliary verb, attaching to the main verb}  6 For example, kureru can be used as a suffix, to mark OBJ or OBJ2 as the EMPATHY LOCUS.
The attachment of yaru marks SUBJECT as the EMPATHY LOCUS.
The complex predicate made by this operation inherits the EMPATHY LOCUS of  the suffixed verb.
For example: Example 19 Hanako ga Taroo ni hon o yonde-kureta.
Hanako SUBJ Taroo OBJ2 book OBJ read-gave Hanako did Taroo a favor in reading a book.
EMPATHY = OBJ2 = TAROO In this case Taroo is interpreted as the EMPATHY LOCUS because of the auxiliary kureta attached to the main verb.
Similarly in example 20, the speaker indicates empa- thy with Hanako by using the past tense form yatta of the verb yaru as an auxiliary verb to the main verb tazuneru.
16 Certain intransitive rbs cannot be made into empathy-loaded v rbs ince the empathy-loaded versions make no sense, .g.
209 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 Example 20 Hanako ga Taroo o tazunete-yatta.
Hanako SUBI Taroo OBJ visit-gave (lit.
)Hanako received afavor in visiting Taroo.
EMPATHY = SUBJ = HANAKO As demonstrated in the following examples, a discourse ntity that is realized as the EMPATHY LOCUS must be EVOKED.
Example 21 Taroo ga Ziroo ni okane o kasite-kureta.
Taroo SUBJ Ziroo OBJ2 money OBJ lend-gave Taroo did Ziroo a favor in lending him some money.
Example 22 *Taroo ga dareka ni okane o kasite-kureta.
Taroo SUBJ somebody OBJ2 money OBJ lend-gave Taroo did somebody a favor in lending him some money.
Example 23 *Taroo ga misiranu hito ni okane o kasite-kureta.
Taroo SUBJ unknown person OBJ2 money OBJ lend-gave Taroo did a stranger afavor in lending him some money.
The contrast between 21, 22, and 23 demonstrates that the use of a BRAND-NEW entity in the EMPATHY LOCUS position of the verb give is not acceptable.
Therefore an entity in the EMPATHY LOCUS position is ranked in a higher position on the Cf than the subject.
3.2.1 Empathy and the Centering Algorithm.
Using the Centering Algorithm, we model EMPATHY as a language-specific discourse factor by adding the EMPATHY-marked discourse ntity to the Cf ranking.
Then preferences for CONTINUE over RETAIN when EMPATHY is involved can be demonstrated, as in example 24 below: 17 Example 24 a. Hanako wa kuruma ga kowarete komatteimasita.
Hanako  TOP/SUBJ car SUBJ broken at a loss-was Her car broken, Hanako was at a loss.
Cb: HANAKO Cf: [HANAKO, CAR] b. Taroo ga 0 sinsetu-ni te o kasite-kuremasita.
Taroo SUBJ OBJ2/EMP kindly hand OBJ lend-gave.
Taroo kindly did (Hanako) a favor in helping her.
Cb: [HANAKO] Cf: [HANAKO, TAROO] EMPATHY SUBJ 17 The verb form kuremasita in 24b is the polite form of kureta, the past tense form of the verb kureru.
210 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse C. Tugi no hi 0 0 eiga ni sasoimasita.
next of day SUBJ OBJ movie to invited Next day (Hanako) invited (Taroo) to a movie.
Cb: HANAKO C fl: [HANAKO, TAROO] CONTINUE 16 SUBJ OBI Cf2: [TAROO, HANAKO ] RETAIN 2 SUBJ OBJ In 24c, the verb invited requires an animate subject and object, and these must be realized by different discourse ntities because of the contraindexing constraint.
Hanako is the most highly ranked entity from 24b that is realized in 24c, and there- fore must be the Cb.
The preferred interpretation is therefore she invited him to a movie (Z = 5.25, p < .001).
This corresponds to Cfl, the more highly ranked CONTINUE tran- sition, in which Hanako is the preferred center, Cp.
This interpretation can be found with minimal processing by trying the Cp(24b), Hanako, as the Cb(24c), by interpret- ing the subject zero as Hanako.
This gives a CONTINUE transition.
Then contraindexing constraints mean that Hanako cannot fill both argument positions, so the object posi- tion is interpreted as Taroo.
This interpretation is found with minimal processing by interleaving the steps of the Centering algorithm proposed in Brennan et al.
Note that nothing special needs to be said about the fact that EMPATHY is the discourse factor that made Hanako the Cp in 24b and thus predicted that Hanako would be the Cb at 24c (pace Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987).
The preference in the interpretation follows from the distinction between CONTINUE and RETAIN and the ranking of Cf.
Thus, the centering framework is easily adapted to handle this language-specific eature.
3.3 Topic and Empathy In general the assignment of the EMPATHY relationship ispragmatic.
It is determined by the speakers relation to the discourse participants in the discourse.
In 24, for example, the EMPATHY relationship between the speaker and Hanako and between the speaker and Taroo is clear: the use of the empathy verb in the second sentence indicates that the speaker is closer to Hanako than to Taroo.
However, besides cases where the speaker clearly expresses who s/he empathizes with, it is also possible for the context o provide some information about he speakers proximity relationship with discourse participants in the given discourse, so that the hearer can determine the EMPATHY relation that the speaker has in mind.
In this paper, we only consider cases where EMPATHY is syntactically marked by the use of empathy- loaded verbs.
Kunos notion of EMPATHY is more general.
For instance, Kunos EMPATHY HIERAR- CHY consists of different scales for EMPATHY that include notions such as TOPIC and SPEAKER (Kuno 1987).
Kunos Topic Empathy Hierarchy suggests that the discourse entity realized as the TOPIC will often coincide with the EMPATHY LOCUS: Topic Empathy Hierarchy: Discourse-Topic > Discourse-Nontopic Given an event or state that involves A and B such that A is corefer- ential with the topic of the present discourse and B is not, it is easier for the speaker to empathize with A than with B.
In support of Kunos claim, we have found that when no empathy relation is clearly indicated and no topic has been clearly established that it is difficult for a 211 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 hearer to determine the empathy relation that the speaker intends.
Previous Cbs and current Cps can be high on the empathy scale, and yet the discourse ntity realized as the grammatical TOPIC does not necessarily coincide with the discourse ntity realized as the EMPATHY LOCUS.
A simple sentence to show this point is given in example 25 below: Example 25 Taroo wa Ziroo ni hon o yonde-kuremasita.
Taroo  TOP/SUBJ Ziroo OBJ2 book OBJ read-gave Taroo gave Ziroo a //avor off reading a book.
EMPATHY = OBJ2 = ZIROO In example 25, Taroo is the TOPIC while Ziroo is the EMPATHY LOCUS.
Similarly, a zero does not have to be realized as the EMPATHY LOCUS.
In 26b the zero in the subject position realizes the Cb and refers to Taroo.
Example 26 a. Taroo wa syukudai o zenbu yari-oemasita.
Taroo TOP/SUB homework OBJ all do-finished Taroo finished his homework.
0 Ziroo ni hon o yonde-kuremasita.
SUBJ Ziroo OBJ2 book OBJ read-gave (Taroo) gave Ziroo a //avor o//reading a book.
EMPATHY = OBJ2 = ZIROO TOPIC is higher than EMPATHY in the Cf ranking.
The higher degree of salience of  TOPIC over EMPATHY is shown by the different interpretation of (b) sentences in examples 27 and 28.
The only difference in these examples is that Mitiko is wa-marked in 27a but is ga-marked in 28a: Example 27 a. Mitiko wa kanai o gityoo ni osite-kuremasita.
Mit iko  TOP/SUBJ w i fe  OBJ/EMP chairman OBJ2 recommend-gave Mitiko did my wife a favor in recommending her as chairperson.
0 asu no kaihyoo-kekka o tanosimi-ni siteim asu.
SUBJ tomorrow of results OBJ look-forward oing-is (Mitiko) is looking forward to tomorrows results.
Example 28 a. Mitiko ga kanai o gityoo ni osite-kuremasita.
Mitiko SUBJ wife OBJ/EMP chairman OBJ2 recommend-gave Mitiko did my wife a //avor in recommending her as chairperson.
0 asu no kaihyoo-kekka o tanosimi-ni siteimasu.
SUBJ tomorrow of results OBJ look-forward oing-is (Mitiko) is looking forward to tomorrows results.
(My wife) is looking forward to tomorrows results.
212 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse The TOPIC Mitiko is preferred as the unexpressed subject of the (b) sentence in example 27.
TM On the other hand, the subject Mitiko is not strongly preferred, as shown in example 28: the zero in the second sentence in 28 is understood as referring to either Mitiko or my wife.
That is, the possible interpretation i these examples hows that the NP my wife, which is realized as the EMPATHY LOCUS, is not as salient as the TOPIC.
19 So why is it easier to empathize with a discourse entity that has been the topic as Kuno demonstrates?
It seems important o keep the notions of TOPIC and EMPATHY separate, but in Section 5.1 we will demonstrate an effect where the topic entity is interpreted as the empathy locus.
We claim that the ranking of the Cf and the poten- tial for a CONTINUE interpretation determines whether this effect will hold.
In other words, the tendency for the topic entity to be interpreted as the empathy locus follows from more general discourse processing factors, such as a hearer preferring CONTINUE transitions within a given local stretch of discourse.
3.4 Summary To summarize,  we have outlined the roles of discourse markers uch as those for TOPIC and EMPATHY by which Japanese grammaticizes some aspects of discourse function, and we have argued that TOPIC and EMPATHY markers can only be used on entities that are already in the discourse context.
One factor that hasnt  been discussed is the role of pronominalization, but many researchers have argued that discourse entities realized by pronouns are more salient than other discourse entities (Clark and Havi land 1977; Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein unpublished; Kuno 1976b, 1987).
We take zeros in Japanese to be analogous to pro- nouns in English in this respect.
Since pronominal ization can apply at any position in the ranking of the Cf, the role of its contribution is particularly interesting when it is in conflict with some other factor such as grammatical  function or topic marking.
This will be discussed further in Section 5.
Initial Center Instantiation INITIAL CENTER INSTANTIATION is a process by which a discourse entity introduced in a segment-initial utterance becomes the Cb.
In our framework, this happens as a side effect of the Centering Algorithm.
Typically, when an interpretation is found for the second utterance in a discourse segment, the Cb becomes instantiated.
The Cb of an initial utterance Ui is treated as a variable that is then unified with whatever Cb is assigned to the subsequent utterance Ui+l.
Typically, a discourse entity is introduced as a ga-marked subject, and then is referred to by a zero in a subsequent utterance (Clancy and Downing 1987).
Consider example 29.
18 The zero may be interpreted as indirectly referring to the speaker.
This interpretation is always possible when the verb kureru is used: the use of kureru implies that the speaker is closer to the beneficiary argument (i.e.
the 0-marked NP in these examples), and the favor given to this person is understood as a benefit o the speaker as well.
19 Although it seems as though empathy isnt higher than subject, he conflating factor is that topic marking establishes a Cb, whereas in 28 no Cb has been established.
This is explained in detail in Section 4.
20 In Walker, Iida, and Cote (1990) we called this Center Establishment.
Henceforth we will refer to this process as Center Instantiation i order to avoid confusion with Kameyamas term center establishment, which is a different mechanism inher theory (Kameyama 1985).
213 Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 Example 29 a. Taroo ga b. deeta o konpyuutaa ni utikondeimasita.
Taroo SUBJ data OBJ computer in was-storing Taroo was storing the data in a computer.
I Cf: [TAROO, DATA] 0 yatto hanbun yari-owarimasita.
SUBJ finally half do-finished Finally (Taroo) was half inished.
[ Cb: TAROO ] Cf: [TAROO] CONTINUE Using Taroo as the subject in example 29a is not enough to establish this discourse segment as being about Taroo.
It is the use of the zero in example 29b that serves to instantiate Taroo as the Cb.
By our definition of CONTINUE, 29b is a continue transition, because Cb(29b) = Cp(29b) and there was no Cb in 29a.
However, Kuno argues that referring to a discourse ntity with a zero is equivalent to marking it as the grammatical topic with wa (Kuno 1972).
Our interpretation of this argument is that the use of wa in a discourse-initial utterance instantiates the wa-marked entity as the Cb in one utterance.
This claim is supported by the contrast with the GA-WA alternation in examples 30 and 31, where there is a shift in interpretation depending on whether Taroo is marked with wa in the first sentence.
21 Example 30 a. Taroo ga b. Ziroo o minna no mae de tatakimasita.
SUBJ OBJ all of front in hit.
Taroo hit Ziroo in front of all the other people.
Cb: [71 [ Cf: [TAROO, ZIROO] Itiniti-zyuu, kanzen-ni 0 0 musi-simasita.
all-day completely ignored (Ziroo) ignored (Taroo) all day.
Cb: TAROO Cf: [TAROO, ZIROO] 3 Cb: ZIROO Cf: [ZIROO, TAROO] 8 In example 30, Taroo is introduced by ga.
In this case, it appears that there is a ten- dency due to lexical semantics to instantiate Ziroo as the Cb in the second utterance.
22 By the centering definitions, taking either Taroo or Ziroo to be the Cb can result in a CONTINUE interpretation.
However, assuming that the Cf ordering at example 30a is correct, constraint 3 is violated by the preferred interpretation of 30b.
Since both of the entities in Cf(30a) are realized, the Cb in example 30b should be the most highly ranked one.
There are two possible conclusions here: (1) In discourse-initial utterances, when 21 These xamples were tested by asking survey participants toindicate preference rankings.
The numbers given here are only for those subjects who expressed strong preferences; some subjects expressed no preference.
22 The number of subjects here are too small to test statistically.
214 Marilyn Walker et al.
Japanese Discourse no clear indication of topic is given, the Cf ordering alone is not a strong constraint; (2) the ordering of the Cf should be partly determined by lexical semantics or other knowledge about the situation being described.
However,  compare example 30 with example 31.
Example 31 a. Taroo wa Ziroo o minna no mae de tatakimasita.
SUBJ OBJ all of front in hit.
Taroo hit Ziroo in front of all the other people.
Cb: [TARO0] Cf: [TAROO, ZIRO0] b. Itiniti-zyuu, kanzen-ni 0 0 musi-simasita.
all-day completely ignored (Taroo) ignored (Ziroo) all day.
Cb: TAROO Cf: [TAROO, ZIROO] 10 Cb: ZIROO Cf: [ZIROO, TAROO] 4 The use of wa in example 31 seems to override the semantic preference that was exhibited in example 30, so that subjects now prefer an interpretation i which Taroo is the Cb.
23 This shows that Taroo has not been instantiated as the Cb
